# R-Sleep-Efficiency-Analysis

1. Introduction
Sleep is an essential part of human health. It helps repair body, regenerate tissues, build bone, build muscle, and strengthen the immune system. Some important variables such as sleep duration, sleep efficiency, REM sleep percentage[1], deep sleep percentage, and light sleep percentage are highly related with sleep quality and health. Sleep efficiency is closely linked to both age and gender, with younger individuals typically exhibiting higher sleep efficiency than older adults. Furthermore, women often maintain slightly better sleep quality than men, but age-related sleep disturbances appear more pronounced in men[2]​. In addition, some factors such as alcohol consumption, smoking, and exercise frequency may also have impact on sleep quality.
In this report, a dataset containing 452 observations, and 14 variables is used for analyzing the relationship between some variables related to sleep quality. The variables in the dataset record the age, gender, bedtime, wakeup time, sleep duration, sleep efficiency, REM sleep percentage, deep sleep percentage, light sleep percentage, awakenings, caffeine consumption, alcohol consumption, smoking status, and exercise frequency.
The objective of this study is to have a deeper understanding of the potential factors affecting sleep quality by conducting data analysis and statistical analysis on the collected dataset.
2. Methodology
The dataset is in csv format, and is loaded into R environment using `read.csv` function. After checking the missing values in this dataset using function `colSums` to calculate the number of missing values in each column, four columns (Awakenings, Caffeine Consumption, Alcohol Consumption, and Exercise Frequency) have a few missing values. Since the number of missing values is not too large, those observations containing missing values are directly removed using function `drop_na()` from `tidyr` package. After removing missing values, outliers in column “Sleep Duration” and “Caffeine Consumption” were identify using IQR method. This method calculates the first quantile (Q1) and third quantile (Q3) of a variable, and then use Q3-Q1 to calculate IQR. Then, the lower bound is set to Q1-1.5*IQR and the upper bound is set to Q3+1.5*IQR. Those observations with value outside of the lower bound and upper bound were removed from the dataset. Finally, the cleaned data is used for creating visualizations using `ggplot` function from R package `ggplot2`. In addition, the `cut` function is used to create categorical variable from numerical variable by setting several cut points.
